# Badianus Manuscript

A Mexica (Aztec) herbal known as the Badianus manuscript is a series of elaborately painted plants with their associated names in Nahuatl and recipes for treating various ailments written in Latin.  This herbal was completed in the 1550s by at least two Nahua men, Martín de la Cruz (an indigenous nobleman and physician) and Juan Badianus (an instructor of Latin), at a European-funded and established school, Santa Cruz in Tlatelolco, Mexico.

Now held by the National Institute of Anthropology and History in Mexico City, the manuscript has been reproduced at least three times since its original creation. In the 17th century, Cassiano dal Pozzo made a copy that became a part of his Museo Caraceo (“Papers Museum”). In the early 20th century, the rediscovery of the original manuscript in the Vatican library piqued the interest of two scholars in the United States. They both hired the same artist to use the original at the Vatican to reproduce the watercolor illustrations. They also both began working on their own texts on the manuscript, one that was published by William E. Gates in 1939 and the other, a more comprehensive version with full facsimile, that was published in 1940 by Emily Walcott Emmart.

Not only do the watercolors present anatomically accurate plant structures, they also represent the ecology in which the plants grow. The ecological knowledge in the manuscript includes both symbols and colors to represent their soils and roots as well as various faunal associations such as snakes or ants. These details of the herbal indicate that the Mexica had a broad understanding of botanical biology and ecology, a level of knowledge not represented in contemporaneous herbals of the time from European writers.
