# Vanilla planifolia

## Introduction

Vanilla planifolia, commonly known as vanilla, is the only orchid to be commercialized for consumption. Yet, we do not consume it for sustenance, but for the enticing flavor and aroma extracted from its fruits. To capture this quality of the plant, one must go through phases of intensive labor interspersed with periods of eager anticipation for more than a year and a half; from pollination to vanilla extract can take up to 18 months by some accounts. Not to mention that this is after waiting up to four years for the plant to even flower so the long process can start. Because of this, vanilla has been imbued with monetary, sensory, and ideological value across time and space.

## Mesoamerican origins

Likely originating in the tropical forests of southwestern Mexico, vanilla has played a central role in the development of Mesoamerican societies for the past several thousand years. For the historic Maya it was credited with curing blood-related illnesses. Known as zizbic or zijzbic in Maya, vanilla is found cited in the Sotuta manuscript of 1798 for its use in recipes for “recurrent blood-vomit” and “blood in the feces”. Intriguingly, it is likewise found in the books of Chilam Bilam, originating between the 17th and 18th centuries, for the treatment of blood-vomit issues. 

It is also found in the earliest indigenous herbal created after European contact, the Badianus manuscript from around 1552 CE, which describes numerous Mexica medicinal recipes. Vanilla is identified as tlilxochitl in Nahua and the plant with ripened fruits is illustrated in a recipe for “Traveler’s Safeguard”. It is also mentioned in a remedy for “The Fatigue of those in Political Office”. The latter is an elaborate recipe involving more than twenty different plant parts, blood and parts from a number of wild animals, bezoar stones from birds, and precious stones to “…bestow the bodily strength of a gladiator, drive out fear and fortify the human heart.” In this recipe, the presence of vanilla in combination with cacao fruit (Tlapalcacauatl) and the flowers of Piper sp. (Mecaxuchitl) is reminiscent of chocolate, a beverage that indigenous rulers imbibed frequently both prehistorically and historically (see Theobroma cacao narrative). 

A short time after the Badianus was created, King Philip II of Spain sent his court physician, Francisco Hernández de Toledo, on a mission to the newly conquered Mexico to identify and collect medicinal plants between 1560-1567 CE.  It is in his posthumously published manuscript that the Nahua word for vanilla is confirmed as tlilxochitl, which is translated in Spanish as flor negra. While the -xochitl and flor parts of both names suggest that it is the flower that is black, it is actually the fruit once ripened or processed. This indigenous name is also quite antithetical to the modern common perception of vanilla as white. In fact, not even the flowers are white. Instead they are varying tones of yellow, inconspicuous against the yellowish-green hues of the rest of the plant until the pods ripen, creating a clear contrast between plant and fruit. In his description of tlilxochitl, Hernandez describes its anatomy, highlighting the epiphytical nature of the orchid by stating “sube por los arboles, y abrazase con ellos” (they grow up trees, and embrace with them).
	
The curative properties of vanilla mentioned in Hernández’s accounts are similar to those found in the Badianus, with a few intriguing differences. Akin to the recipe for “The Fatigue of those in Political Office”, Hernandez observed the use of vanilla in the cacao drink with mecaxuchitl, again invoking this triad of plants reminiscent of chocolate beverages well-known to be consumed throughout Mesoamerica. Yet, in this latter recipe, no other plants, animals’ parts, or stones are included. And, instead of curing political fatigue, and with an emphasis on the inclusion of mecaxuchitl for its effects, it is said to cause a number of things, among them are menstruation and abortion.

## Replicating nature for human consumption

### Indigenous: Curing and drying

Historical documents attest to the existence of an elaborate trade network in the Maya region during the 16th and 17th centuries, largely based on the triad of cacao, achiote, and vanilla (Caso Barrera and Aliphat Fernandez 2006). Such a network influenced political affairs, including alliances and warfare, because these plants were essential to a socially and politically important beverage: chocolate. Similar to cacao and achiote, vanilla requires intensive processing before it can be consumed for its fragrant and distinct extract. Yet, if the orchid was left to its own devices, it would ripen itself after several months and the same amount of vanillin, the compound responsible for its enticing aroma, could be found in the pods as in the human manipulated pods. Yet, as humans often are, the inhabitants of the neotropics were impatient and took it upon themselves to experiment and find a way to get the aroma they wanted out of the pods faster. The process they discovered is still quite a long and laborious one, however.
